Facade Pattern with NgRx (#193)
ippontech/blog-usa: posts/ngrx-facade-pattern.md

# Facade Pattern with NgRx

> Over the last few years, I have seen many developers struggle with state management and understanding the [Redux Pattern](https://redux.js.org/understanding/thinking-in-redux/three-principles). By implementing the Facade Pattern, you can add a layer of abstraction over your state management and decouple the knowledge of stores from your component. In this blog, we will discuss the Facade Pattern with NgRx and the benefits of implementing them together.

Reviewer: This combined with your closing sentences confuses me - the setup you have here leads me to believe that you're recommending the Facade Pattern as an abstraction for those who are confused by Redux/NgRx, but at the end you say that teams should only consider the Facade Pattern if they have a solid understanding of NgRx, not as an obfuscation.

Author: I will reword my conclusion, but I want to convey that you should not *skip* teaching devs about NgRx. If the service is written, for the most part they wouldn't have to interact with it. 

The abstraction is good to move fast for those that are unfamiliar. In the future not knowing how stores work will only become a hindrance for new intent/whenever you will have to write it yourself.

Reviewer: Roger that. So abstracting the NgRx into a service functions to allow a newer dev to focus on what is component logic separately from what is NgRx logic, simplifying each while they look at each

Author: Yes, I rewrote my conclusion to try to make that more clear.

## What is NgRx?
NgRx is a reactive state management framework for Angular applications that is based on redux. NgRx provides libraries for managing state, isolation of side effects, entity collection management, Angular router integration, and developer tooling.

### How NgRx Works
Visit the [NgRx](https://ngrx.io/) website for more resources about the framework. The state management lifecycle below shows how we select and update our read-only state from our store.
![NgRx Lifecycle](/images/2021/12/ngrx-state-management-lifecycle.png)

### Key Concepts
* `Actions` describe events that are emitted (dispatched) to change state.
* State changes are handled by `reducers`, which are pure functions that describe how our state is to be transformed.
* `Selectors` are pure functions that derive and compose a read-only piece of state.
* We select a piece of state from the `store` using `selectors`.

## Facade Pattern

> Now we will dive into what is the Facade Pattern and how to implement it with NgRx.

Reviewer: I would move some words around to get "...dive into what the Facade Pattern is and..."

Now let's create an `AccountService` that will act as our facade for NgRx.
``` Typescript

@Injectable({
  providedIn: 'root',
})
export class AccountService {
  accountList = this.store.select(getAccountList);

  constructor(private store: Store<AccountListState>) {}

  loadAccountList() {
    this.store.dispatch(new LoadAccountList());
  }

  addAccount(account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new AddAccount(account));
  }

  editAccount(id: string, account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new EditAccount({ id, account }));
  }

  deleteAccount(id: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new DeleteAccount(id));
  }
}

```

After moving everything related to the store into our service, we can then inject that service into our component.

``` Typescript

export class AccountListComponent implements OnInit {
  accountList: Observable<Account[]>;

  constructor(private accountService: AccountService) {}

  ngOnInit() {
    this.accountList = this.accountService.accountList;

    this.accountService.loadAccountList();
  }

  addAccount(account: string) {
    this.accountService.addAccount(account);
  }

  editAccount(id: string, account: string) {

>     this.accountService.editAccount({ id, account });

Reviewer 2: AccountService takes two params instead of an object.  Would align it one way or the other.

Author: @johnstrickler updated. That was supposed to be two separate string params

  }

  deleteAccount(id: string) {
    this.accountService.deleteAccount(id);
  }
}

```
After implementing the facade pattern what did we actually gain?

### Pros
- Better developer experience.

>     - Devs only interact with a service instead of NgRx stores, actions, and reducers.

Reviewer: Presumably some dev will also have to write the AccountService and deal with NgRx stuff... Maybe "Devs have clearer focus on either NgRx interactions or component actions, without having to think about both at the same time" or something like that?

Author: updated

    - You can refactor your component without touching the store logic. 
    - You can change your state management implementation without touching your component.
- This service can be reused by other components that need to access our `accountList` instead of duplicating code.

> - Scalability.

Author: I think it wrapped a little in to the one above it, so I edited the pros

### Cons

> - Loss of indirection violates a redux pattern.

Reviewer: Is this really "_loss of_ indirection violates a pattern" or "_indirection_ violates a pattern"? Reading the sub-bullet, I'm really not sure. Is `indirection` a Redux concept/term (in which case, could you link to some resource on it?) or your word choice (in which case, could you opt for something more familiar to the reader or otherwise make clearer?)?

Author: updated. I tried to make that clear in the sub-bullet

    -  The indirection of separating descriptions of "what happened" from the logic that determines "how the state should be updated" allows redux to track how the state changed every time an action is dispatched. 
- At the cost of being easier to interact with, the facade pattern obfuscates how NgRx works. This may hinder the understanding of the state management lifecycle for other developers on the team.

> - Actions could be reused instead of treating them as unique events.

Author: elaborated on this

---
authors:
- Cody Frenzel
tags:
- Angular
- Javascript
- NgRx
- State Management
- Software Craft
- Facade Pattern
date: 2022-01-03T00:00:00.000Z
title: Facade Pattern with NgRx
---

Over the last few years, I have seen many developers struggle with state management and understanding the [Redux Pattern](https://redux.js.org/understanding/thinking-in-redux/three-principles). By implementing the Facade Pattern, you can add a layer of abstraction over your state management and decouple the knowledge of stores from your component. In this blog, we will discuss the Facade Pattern with NgRx and the benefits of implementing them together.

## What is NgRx?

> NgRx is a reactive state management framework for Angular applications that is based on redux. NgRx provides libraries for managing state, isolation of side effects, entity collection management, Angular router integration, and developer tooling.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NgRx is a reactive state management framework for Angular applications that is based on Redux. NgRx provides libraries for managing state, isolation of side effects, entity collection management, Angular router integration, and developer tooling.
```

### How NgRx Works
Visit the [NgRx](https://ngrx.io/) website for more resources about the framework. The state management lifecycle below shows how we select and update our read-only state from our store.
![NgRx Lifecycle](/images/2021/12/ngrx-state-management-lifecycle.png)

### Key Concepts
* `Actions` describe events that are emitted (dispatched) to change state.
* State changes are handled by `reducers`, which are pure functions that describe how our state is to be transformed.
* `Selectors` are pure functions that derive and compose a read-only piece of state.
* We select a piece of state from the `store` using `selectors`.

## Facade Pattern
Dive into what the Facade Pattern is and learn how to implement it with NgRx.

### What is a Facade?
In software, a facade provides a public interface to mask the usage of something more complex. In this instance, it will neatly wrap our NgRx interactions and allow one point of contact for our component and state management without our component having any knowledge of NgRx.

### Implementation

> Before jumping in to the facade example, here is a component using NgRx without a facade.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before jumping in to the facade example, here is a component using NgRx _without_ a facade.
```

``` Typescript

export class AccountListComponent implements OnInit {
  accountList: Observable<Account[]>;

  constructor(private store: Store<AccountListState>) {}

  ngOnInit() {
    this.accountList = this.store.select(getAccountList);

    this.loadAccountList();
  }

  loadAccountList() {
    this.store.dispatch(new LoadAccountList());
  }

  addAccount(account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new AddAccount(account));
  }

  editAccount(id: string, account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new EditAccount({ id, account }));
  }

  deleteAccount(id: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new DeleteAccount(id));
  }
}

```

> This implementation is very `store` dependent and makes the component more complex. By adding a facade for the component to interact with, we can simplify the access to our store and decouple the knowledge of NgRx in our component. By performing that separation of duties, if we choose to remove NgRx in the future we do not have to refactor our component.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This implementation is `store`-dependent and makes the component more complex. By adding a facade for the component to interact with, we can simplify the access to our store and decouple the knowledge of NgRx in our component. By performing that separation of duties,  we do not have to refactor our component should we choose to remove NgRx in the future.
```

  providedIn: 'root',
})
export class AccountService {
  accountList = this.store.select(getAccountList);

  constructor(private store: Store<AccountListState>) {}

  loadAccountList() {
    this.store.dispatch(new LoadAccountList());
  }

  addAccount(account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new AddAccount(account));
  }

  editAccount(id: string, account: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new EditAccount({ id, account }));
  }

  deleteAccount(id: string) {
    this.store.dispatch(new DeleteAccount(id));
  }
}

```

After moving everything related to the store into our service, we can then inject that service into our component.

``` Typescript

export class AccountListComponent implements OnInit {
  accountList: Observable<Account[]>;

  constructor(private accountService: AccountService) {}

  ngOnInit() {
    this.accountList = this.accountService.accountList;

    this.accountService.loadAccountList();
  }

  addAccount(account: string) {
    this.accountService.addAccount(account);
  }

  editAccount(id: string, account: string) {
    this.accountService.editAccount( id, account);
  }

  deleteAccount(id: string) {
    this.accountService.deleteAccount(id);
  }
}

```

> After implementing the facade pattern what did we actually gain?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What exactly did we gain after implementing the facade pattern?
```

### Pros
- Better developer experience through abstraction.
    - You refactor your service or component without touching both.

>     - Your component doesn't care what library you use for managing state.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Your component does not care what library you use for managing state.
```

- This service can be reused by other components that need to access our `accountList` instead of duplicating code.
- Your components are more simplistic.

>     - Devs have a clearer focus on component functionality instead of NgRx stores, actions, and reducers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Developers have a more clear focus on component functionality instead of NgRx stores, actions, and reducers.
```

### Cons

> - Loss of indirection violates a redux pattern.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Loss of indirection violates a Redux pattern.
```

>     -  Indirection decouples "what happened" from the logic that determines "how the state should be updated". This allows redux to track how the state changed every time an action gets dispatched. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    -  Indirection decouples "what happened" from the logic that determines "how the state should be updated." This allows Redux to track how the state changed every time an action gets dispatched. 
```

- At the cost of being easier to interact with, the facade pattern obfuscates how NgRx works. This may hinder the understanding of the state management lifecycle for other developers on the team.
- Actions could be reused instead of treating them as unique events.
   - If actions are reused, then changing one can impact multiple components across our application.
   - The concept of reusing actions goes against [good action hygiene](https://indepth.dev/posts/1407/force-good-action-hygiene-and-write-less-actions-in-ngrx-with-the-prepared-events-pattern#:~:text=Good%20Action%20Hygiene,-Link%20to%20this&text=Takeaway%20%2D%20Treat%20Actions%20as%20unique,by%20going%20through%20the%20reducers.)
   - [NgRx DevTools](https://blog.angular-university.io/angular-ngrx-devtools/) has an action log that may be less useful for debugging with generic actions.

### Conclusion

> While this may violate some of the standards and recommendations of the redux pattern, I don't think the gains your team can have in development speed are outweighed. If you need to move fast there is a clear upside to using facades, but I would make sure the developers on the team also gain a solid understanding of NgRx. By understanding NgRx and the potential issues that using a facade may bring, you can write better code as a team and avoid those problems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While this may violate some of the standards and recommendations of the Redux pattern, I do not think the gains your team can have in development speed are outweighed. If you need to move fast, there is a clear upside to using facades, but I would make sure the developers on the team also gain a solid understanding of NgRx. By understanding NgRx and the potential issues that using a facade may bring, you can write better code as a team and avoid those problems.
```
